---
layout: post
title: Tales of a Traveling Software Developer

---

Not long ago, I decided to go on sabbatical. Since then, I have spent time in many interesting places - some for work, some for conferences, some just for the sheer hell of it. As the year is ending, I thought I would share parts of my journey. Perhaps you may wish to visit some of these places. Some of them, you will not.

In January of 2016, I visited the sister of a Brother who lives in Phoenix. She kindly showed me the city where she had recently relocated from somewhere in Long Island. We ate breakfast at the Breakfast Club, and looked for a relative who drowned in the attack on Pearl Harbor. They have planted a [huge gun](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wesley_Bolin_Memorial_Plaza&sa=D&ust=1482623967166000&usg=AFQjCNGoLwErPNJygj1Ww_q9CPpQvM0xOQ) for the lost sailors of the Arizona.

In February, I flew to Atlanta, and was promptly greeted by a cheerful Hawaiian professional photographer, turned recreational Uber driver, who gave a white kid tips for how to survive on the streets of Atlanta over Italian pasta. I think he took pity on me sitting in the backseat of his BMW. Besides [the bomb evacuation](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://www.cbs46.com/story/31337956/suspicious-package-found-under-car-in-downtown-atlanta&sa=D&ust=1482623967167000&usg=AFQjCNGetr56cOQtahJkLxLoUKNY98qVXA) at DevNexus, it was a pretty nice trip.

Later that month, I boarded a train from New York to Montreal for [ConFoo](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://confoo.ca/&sa=D&ust=1482623967168000&usg=AFQjCNHN2iQT8p4q2R4i--Bm_RLWtKZ-kA). After running for miles in the freezing sleet, wondering what I was doing with my life and nearly succumbing to hypothermia, I met some incredibly kind people, including a friend from Brasil, the organizers, a [plugin](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://plugins.jetbrains.com/idea/plugin/7896-markdown-navigator&sa=D&ust=1482623967169000&usg=AFQjCNHR8My4lZ0R1-FzmjQAYUJpqnJ91A) developer, and lots of Canadians. Great conference.

Shortly after, I drove down to EclipseCon in Washington, DC, where I met some friendly people from [a top-secret Russian laboratory](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DHJOpNss7tCQ&sa=D&ust=1482623967170000&usg=AFQjCNHb1hg4qWDqL7bHNgB837gZshsIMg), Goldman Sachs, and a couple of lawyers for the CFTC. I also had a chance to visit the National Basilica, a gigantic statue of Albert Einstein and the National Museum of Natural History. Go there.

In April I had a layover in Hong Kong and decided to get Dim Sum. Instead, I wandered around and got caught in a thunderstorm. So I did what anyone would normally do and climbed the tallest mountain I could find. After nearly dying of electrocution, the stormclouds parted and I caught a glimpse of the sprawling cyberpunk nirvana that is Greater Hong Kong.

The rain started back up again, so I ducked into an empty church to dry off. Suddenly, there a great commotion - hundreds of children, dripping and tripping all over the place. They came in busses and bunches, shuffling onto the benches. Thunder and pouring rain. Umbrellas and coats. Candles everywhere. Then, they began to sing. I never heard anything so beautiful.

Landing in Bangalore, I was greeted by the sound of pandemonium. Bangalore is the tech capital of India, and I was here to work. After a long series of business meetings, chasing down deliveries, hailing three-wheeled contraptions, and drinking my weight in water every day, I felt cautiously prepared for the ensuing conference festivities.

Our tiny booth was quickly overwhelmed by a multitude of curious people. And from dawn to dusk, we shook hands, we gave away shirts, we held quizzes. Following an amazing culinary extravaganza and near-death experience with food-poisoning on MG Road, I am convinced Indian food, like all delicious things, is best consumed in moderation.

Two colleagues took it upon themselves to personally drive me around Bangalore, broker steaming cups of tea from passing chaiwallas, order samosa, vada pav, and chats from busy street vendors, visit parliamentary buildings, gold-laden temples, purchase a saree, navigate massive thoroughfares and narrow alleyways, negotiate access to gated compounds.

Two things stand out in my mind. Indian enthusiasm is contagious. As a North American, my people are cool, reserved. We work hard, and complain hard. Indians are hard working, and will happily talk to you about anything under the sun. I guess everyone is the same, everyone is different. But I am deeply grateful for their kindness.

After a brief stint in Dharavi, Mumbai, I flew back to New York with a new set of problems. So I decided to ignore them and go for a prolonged bike trip through the Pacific Northwest. It turns out that was just a different set of problems. I took the Amtrak Cascades from Seattle to Vancouver, rented a bike and headed for Alaska.

After several near-death collisions, I gave up and settled for Whistler. If you sit at a desk for twelve hours a day, don’t try to peddle a bike 80 miles uphill the next one. Thank me later. But Whistler has fresh air, LTE, and skiing in May, so I was happy. I watched the seaplanes take off over Green Lake and wondered what I was doing with my life.

After taking stock of the situation, I decided to pursue the full-time occupation of chasing a girl halfway around the planet. That was a pretty good idea in hindsight. We met in Vancouver, in Austin, in New York, in Boston and Portland and everywhere in between, you name it and we were probably there for some event or meetup this May and June.

Planes. Trains. Automobiles. Every week was somewhere new. The daily milieu of new faces and scenes provided a welcome diversion to the reality of my situation. I chatted with Iranians barbers in Vancouver, lunched with captive bears on Grouse Mountain, explored castaway shipwrecks on False Creek, sat on the largest chair in San Fransisco, tested the [longest slide](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/22/arts/design/testing-new-york-citys-longest-slide-on-governors-island.html&sa=D&ust=1482623967179000&usg=AFQjCNGtdaHWLj7k9jQxUJLvujQnRKC4Kw) in New York.

How does one afford to travel so much? The answer is, as frequent flyers will explain in hushed voices, with lots of credit cards. By the interest earned from delinquent debtors and with a little help from Uncle Sam, US banks will simply hand you fake currency, if you pay your credit card bills in a timely fashion, that may be used at various airlines and hotel chains.

In June, I boarded UA 149 to São Paulo International Airport. That plane never arrived in São Paulo International Airport. Nor did any of the subsequent flights I was offered. Instead we were dropped behind customs in Rio Galeão without food or water for eight hours. To my amazement, United Airlines does not seem to recognize any problem with this. All of the Brazilians just shrugged and laughed.

In São Paulo I had some [amazing milkshakes](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://twitter.com/breandan/status/750761636714151936&sa=D&ust=1482623967182000&usg=AFQjCNHXL4d-kwhR-TzR5tItOFm84bjixw), ate coxinhas and churrasco. I kept watch for police as my friend flew a drone around Ibirapuera Park to great public alarm, reassured fleeing bystanders, and in general did a whole lot of chasing other people around the city. I had excellent Japanese food. Somehow managed to give a coherent talk about machine learning. Or maybe not. English is not their first language.

In July, I fired my dentist. In hindsight, that was not a good idea. He was getting on my nerves with the appointment reminders, but he was a consummate professional, through and through. Dentists are good people, and even if they are a little fanatical about oral hygiene, they have your best interests at heart. You should see one regularly.

Later that month, I landed in Los Angeles. This was my first mistake. After breaking down in an antique automobile on I-15, I nearly perished from dehydration in the great suburban wasteland that lies east of LA, running to make an appointment with my father’s third ex-wife. Do not try to drive a car twice your age through the desert in summertime.

In August, after surviving another bout of food poisoning, I flew from LA to Bergen, Norway, by way of Dallas and London. The plan was to meet my girlfriend in Hamburg in ten days time. Plenty of time to take the train from Bergen to Oslo to Stockholm to Malmö to København to Hamburg. Or so I thought.

I spent a day dodging lorries in a dodgy part of London on Santander Cycles, and eating mediocre Ramen in Piccadilly Circus. After making my Heathrow connection with seconds to spare, I arrived in Bergen, still breathless, with my newly printed European Rail pass proudly in hand to show the customs officer. He sighed, and stamped my passport.

The journey from Bergen to Oslo was otherworldly, filled with gaping Fjords, scenic vistas, glacial streams, and mountain passes. I sat next to a biologist studying seasonal migration patterns and teaching a summer seminar in Voss. I watched the Norwegian villages and stations glide past my window. Norway is a breathtakingly gorgeous place.

Stayed with a rock band living in Oslo. They kindly loaned me their bicycle, which I put to extensive use exploring the neighboring countryside. There, I wandered into a surreal village that looked like it was from the 16th century. The townsfolk, dressed in period clothing, made pointed gestures at my bicycle while speaking in Norse. This was confusing, as I do not speak Norse and happened to be only person from the 21st century that morning. I discovered it was a historical reenactment, filled with live actors and livestock. Nearby, is the Royal farm of Norway filled with armed guards patrolling empty cattle fields. I took the ferry back and ate some delicious Punjabi food for dinner.

I arrived in Stockholm late. The host was asleep, or forgot about my arrival. After accidentally waking up her neighbor and probably the whole apartment building, we arranged to meet the nice old lady, who apologized to everyone in Swedish, made some tea and introduced me to her city. Stockholm is a big park with a city attached. You can bike alongside people horsebacking through the woods. Have lunch in the middle of green pastures. I went to a television station in the sky. Toured an old warship dredged up from the bottom of the sea.

King of Sweden orders the largest warship ever built. Three masts. 64 guns. Topheavy, narrow-looking monstrosity. Two years to build the damn thing. Launches to much public fanfare. No ballast. Light breeze starts to blow in the harbor, and she sinks, killing thirty sailors. King quickly starts an investigation. Everyone points up the chain of command, back to the King who rubber stamped the plan. Investigation quickly ends. Remind you of any software projects?

Malmö is an little city on the coast of southern Sweden. The area where I stayed had long rows of block-style housing with WWII-era bomb shelters underneath. They have a tall building called the Turning Torso, visible from any point in the city and which my host pointed out enthusiastically. Disappointingly, it did not turn. Very windy and fairly chilly here in August. I rode to Øresund Bridge and returned for hot chocolate, then boarded the commuter train to København.

In København, I stayed with a marketing director for a particle accelerator somewhere in Sweden (apparently, big science projects need marketing people to help secure grants and so forth). He gave me directions to an excellent Ramen place nearby, and told me to visit a high-energy particle accelerator called DESY in Hamburg.

There exists a train from Copenhagen to Hamburg which has the distinction (unbeknownst to me at the time) of being a [boat train](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boat_train&sa=D&ust=1482623967191000&usg=AFQjCNHRm52M_XSM_S504Szno44TBNKAEA). So you can imagine my excitement to be suddenly sitting on such a train, aboard a boat. They even gave us the opportunity to disembark from said train onto said boat, which I availed to great satisfaction.

My girlfriend met me in Hamburg. Much to her chagrin, my primary reason for visiting there was to see the Miniatur Wunderland, which in the German language is a land of miniature wonders. To her further chagrin, the second reason was now DESY. This time, I went alone. I slipped into a small tour, lead by someone who looked important. Later I discovered the tour was in German, but then it was too late to turn back. I nodded thoughtfully and continued to do so for the remaining three hours as we walked from one secure facility to the next. Crisis averted.

We then proceeded to visit a number of central European cities. Bonn for a week. Berlin for a few days. Potsdam for a day. Zurich for a day. Bern for a day. Lausanne for two. Zermatt and St. Moritz for a day. Salzburg for a week. Two days in Frankfurt. It was a whirlwind of trains, running to catch trains, finding our train was delayed, scrambling taxis to catch another train, etc. This required weeks of planning, but happily we made all of our scheduled connections, through careful chronological concentration.

Bonn is a quaint city with a surprising amount of trivia. Once home to Beethoven and former capital of Germany, it now houses the T-Mobile headquarters, Haribo, a large solar conglomerate, and has the [best scrambled eggs](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://www.midi-bonn.de/das-midi/&sa=D&ust=1482623967193000&usg=AFQjCNFuL5W6DdsefuX_lRs6uQQYSZ16Tw) I have personally tasted. Met a geology student who wanted to visit America. I encouraged him to do so. Later, I tried Club-Mate for the first time, and went to some good [talks at FrOSCon](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://media.ccc.de/c/froscon2016&sa=D&ust=1482623967194000&usg=AFQjCNFB_9eujpTffbVY1nI5DnTIXdOX_Q).

From what I gathered, Berlin is a very culturally diverse and hip place to be. Personally, I was more interested in the historical bits, but there is a lot to take in. There is Shanghainese food, neat European bistros, foreign exchange students hopping gleefully with stories of their latest party, vast swaths of beautifully manicured parks, loads of history. You could spend weeks here. Unfortunately, I only had a few days.

It was in Berlin where I realized the cultural differences between Germany and America. In the US we are outwardly warm, sometimes overtly so. Germans are outwardly cold, but inwardly warm and caring human beings. These differences may cause some misunderstanding. You may think a German is being curt, or rude. Do not fret. The Germans are very kind, once you get to know one.

There is a monument in the middle of Berlin, which you should visit, called [Neue Wache](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neue_Wache&sa=D&ust=1482623967196000&usg=AFQjCNEiyZIV2ffInVSRPL7jR7RKkOaNPg). On a boulevard full of pompous looking buildings, it looks like any other. But you take a moment to step inside, it will catch you off guard. Behind iron bars and beneath a hole in the roof sits a mother cradling her dead son. There are thousands of war memorials with huge guns. Go here instead.

Potsdam is nice to visit if you like palaces and gardens. I took the S-Bahn to Potsdam, rented a bike at the station and rode for hours through the park. Later, I returned to Berlin and visited the Olympic Stadium, a very impressive piece of architecture, which is accessible from the same line. But even if you’re not into stuffy old castles, you should visit Potsdam, because it is a very peaceful place indeed.

After a brief episode of franticly running around Berlin, chasing down a taxi, swerving to avoid oncoming traffic, and scrambling around the station to find our platform, we leapt aboard the City Nightline to Zurich, luggage and all, as they closed their doors and whistled to beat the band. The conductor tapped on his watch crossly. It was all very [Wes Anderson-Esque](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D8Q6YqCRMwEI&sa=D&ust=1482623967198000&usg=AFQjCNGe7ug841ts4CnWQH9PnZlZ196VZw), except far less fun.

We awoke to the Zurich sunshine in August, and quickly realized the sun can be very hot under prolonged exposure. Storing our luggage in the train station, we had some Muesli for breakfast, walked around the public swimming areas, had fish at Nordsee, a German fast food chain. You probably wouldn’t associate fresh fish with fast food, but it is surprisingly palatable. Then it was time to go to Bern.

Bern has some very good restaurants that I highly recommend visiting if you have the time and inclination. We toured the Einstein house, strolled through the Rose Garden, peered into a bear bit, dipped our feet into the icy blue river, and did a good bit of touristy sounding things. Switzerland is a magical place if you have never been there before, as I had.

Geneva is the home of CERN, and the primary reason why we went. You need to book a [guided tour](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://visit.cern/tours/guided-tours-individuals&sa=D&ust=1482623967202000&usg=AFQjCNG4tUMV_8tlf9QEBC5l4C8GfCIflA) two weeks in advance, which gets reserved within a few minutes of new availability each day, so be prepared to hit refresh 15 days before your date arrives. The group self-selects for scientifically literate people, and the guide knew particle physics, so the tour is technically very educational.

From Geneva, we took a train to Visp, and up to Zermatt via a special mountain railway that winds along the mountainside, between cliffside dwellings perched on dubious foundations. Out of an abundance of caution, we had avoided a similar funicular excursion just a few days earlier, due to [large earthquake](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_2016_Central_Italy_earthquake&sa=D&ust=1482623967203000&usg=AFQjCNGk1dzirQZdAApgTL-X0ypowHacyQ) that struck central Italy.

The town of Zermatt is only accessible by train, which is a good thing, because we had no other way to get up there. However this means that it is inaccessible when there are slides or avalanches. Fortunately, there were no recent slides or avalanches, and we arrived without incident. Stayed at the Best Western (an great choice in Switzerland, unlike the US) and watched the sun set on the Matterhorn.

The next morning, we left bright and early on the Glacier Express, the slowest high speed train in the world. Scenic waypoints are described in dulcet sing-song, like a narrator reading children’s fairy tale, in English, German, Italian, French and possible Romansh. We passed through steep mountain passes, sweeping valleys, and trestles over deep gorges.

Arriving in St. Moritz later that afternoon, we hauled our bags half a kilometer uphill into a hotel above a pizza shop, sauntered by the lake while people maneuvered small sailboats, and watched tuxedo-clad chaps jump horses over fences in the late summer sunshine. It was all spectacularly European. St. Moritz is very extravagant, dripping with fur, fast cars and grand old hotels.

Then we took a train to Salzburg, by way of Zurich. Austria was really interesting, and much more down-to-earth than Switzerland. I grew up watching The Sound of Music every Christmas, so there was an immediate connection. We also had a week in one place, so were able to get to know our surroundings much better.

If you have never been, Salzburg is a town on a river, near an abundance of old salt mines. Salt used to be the currency of the day, back in the day, hence the English “Salary”. This means that Salzburg was a very wealthy place when salt was legal tender, and accumulated a great deal of castles and aristocratic types in the mining business.